2024 INSC 210
1
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3855 OF 2024
(ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO. 779 OF 2016)
U.P. AVAS EVAM VIKAS PARISHAD
 
    … APPELLANT
Versus
CHANDRA SHEKHAR AND ORS.
       … RESPONDENTS
   
J U D G M E N T
SURYA KANT, J.
1.
Leave granted.
2.
The appellant­U.P. Avas Evam Vikas Parishad (Board) is aggrieved
by the judgment dated 07.10.2015, passed by a Division Bench of the
High   Court   of   Judicature   at   Allahabad,   Lucknow   Bench,   whereby
acquisition in respect of Khasra No.673 (mentioned as plot No. 673 in the
impugned   judgment),   situated   within   the   revenue   estate   of   village
Hariharpur,   Tehsil   and   District   Lucknow,   has   been   quashed   on   the
ground   that   the   respondent­tenure   holders   were   not   accorded
opportunity  to   submit  objections   against   the  proposed  acquisition  in
accordance   with   Section   29   of   the   U.P.   Avas   Evam   Vikas   Parishad
Adhiniyam, 1965 (in short, `the 1965 Act’).
3.
The 1965 Act was enacted by the State legislature through Act No.1
Digitally signed by
satish kumar yadav
Date: 2024.03.16
12:57:53 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2
of 1966 and has, thereafter, been re­enacted by U.P. Act No.30 of 1974,
to   provide   for   the   establishment,   incorporation   and   functioning   of   a
Housing and Development Board in Uttar Pradesh.
4.
Section 28 of the 1965 Act contemplates that when any Housing or
Improvement   Scheme   is   framed,   the   Board   shall   prepare   a   notice
depicting  the  boundaries  of  the  area  comprised  in that  Scheme;  the
details of the land proposed to be acquired and the date by which the
objections to the Scheme are to be invited. Such notice is required to be
published weekly for three consecutive weeks in the Gazette and two
daily   newspapers   having   circulation   in   the   area   comprised   in   the
Scheme, at least one of which shall have to be a Hindi newspaper.
5.
Section 29 of the 1965 Act provides that the Board shall serve a
notice   in   such   form   on   such   persons   or   classes   of   persons   in   the
prescribed manner for executing the Scheme.
6.
Section 30 of the 1965 Act enables the person on whom a notice
under Section 29 has been served to make an objection in writing to the
Board against the Scheme or the proposed acquisition or levy, etc.  After
consideration of such objections, and when the prior sanction from the
State   Government   is   obtained,   the   Scheme   shall   be   notified   under
Section 32 of the 1965 Act, and it shall come into force therefrom.
7.
Section  55   of   the   1965   Act   confers   power   to   acquire   land   for
implementation of the Scheme under the Act, and it reads as follows:
“55.  Power to acquire land.­ (1) Any land or any interest

3
therein required by the Board for any of the purposes of this
Act,   may   be   acquired   under   the   provisions   of   the   Land
Acquisition Act, 1894 (Act No. I of 1894), as amended in its
application to Uttar Pradesh, which for this purpose shall be
subject to the modification specified in the Schedule to this
Act. 
(2) If any land in respect of which betterment fee has been
levied under this Act is subsequently required for any of the
purposes   of   this   Act,   such   levy   shall   not   be   deemed   to
prevent   the   acquisition   of   the   land   under   the   Land
Acquisition Act, 1894 (Act Ne. I of 1894).”
8.
 In purported exercise of its powers under Section 28 of the Act, the
appellant­Board issued a notice on 17.07.2004 (Annexure P­1) giving a
description of the Scheme called as the Sultanpur Road Bhoomi Vikas
Evam Grahsthan Yojna at Lucknow.   The said notice vividly described
the lands/properties which were to fall within the Scheme, the map of
the area, particulars of the Scheme and the details of the land which was
proposed to be acquired was notified to be available in the Office of the
Housing Commissioner. It was further stipulated that the objections to
the   Scheme   shall   also   be   received   by   the   Office   of   the   Housing
Commissioner (Land Acquisition Section) within 30 days from the date of
publication of the said notification.
9.
It is a matter of record that Khasra No.673 at village Hariharpur did
not find any mention in the aforesaid notification dated 17.07.2004.
10.
The case of the respondents is that Khasra Nos.672 and 673 were
mutated in their favour on 10.10.1999, as can be seen from the entries
in the revenue record, a copy whereof has been placed on record as
Annexure P.6.

4
11.
It   is   also   not   in   dispute   that   the   tenure   holding/ownership   of
Khasra No.673 was later on changed in favour of one Chandrika S/o
Harishchandra, Guruprasad S/o Jawahir, and the entries to this effect
were   reportedly  made  in   the   revenue   record   on   13.08.2003   and
09.02.2004.
12.
While   the   respondents   pleaded   that   the   entries   in   the   revenue
record were altered fraudulently behind their  backs in collusion and
connivance   with   Chandrika   and   others   and   the   statutory   procedure
envisaged to make such changes was not followed, the case of the Board
is that the notice proposing to acquire the subject­land was issued to
Guruprasad,   in   whose   favour   the   entries   subsisted   on   the   date
immediate prior to the issuance of Notification under Section 28 of the
1965 Act. In other words, the appellant’s stand is that they were not
obligated   to   serve   any   notice   on   the   respondents   as   they   were   not
amongst the interested persons as per the entries in the revenue record,
and   that   such   a   notice   was   duly   served   on   the   persons   who   were
recorded as the tenure­holders as per the revenue record.
13.
The question whether the appellant­Board ought to have served
individual notice upon the respondents under Section 29 of the 1965
Act, has been answered by the High Court vide the impugned judgment
in favour of the respondents for two sets of reasons. Firstly, the High
Court,   with   regard   to   the   entries   made   in   favour   of   Chandrika   and
others, has observed as follows:

5
“It   has   been   brought   to   our   notice   by   the   learned
Standing Counsel, on the basis of enquiry, which has been
held   by   the   respondents,   that   surprisingly   the   name   of
Chandrika has been found to be recorded in khatas of three
villages to the extent of area 9.64 hectares. The entry of
Chandrika in respect of khatas of three villages is not to be
confined to this extent only, but the authorities are obliged
to make further enquiry in respect of such entries prevailing
in Sadar Tehsil in district Lucknow. 
It is to be noted that not only Chandrika whose name
has been recorded in clandestine manner, but there may be
other persons, whose names have also been recorded in the
like manner and the poor farmers do not come to know that
some name has been entered on the eve of acquisition and
that too without any knowledge to them. If the name of any
person has to be recorded in the khata, then it is incumbent
upon   the   Tehsildar   to   give   notice   and   hear   the   recorded
tenure holder personally and thereafter make any change in
the khata of the recorded tenure holder. 
The novel method  adopted  in  entering  the name of
Chandrika in so many khatas itself throws doubt upon the
manner in which, the entry in the name of Chandrika has
been made. This is a serious matter and it requires thorough
enquiry. 
The   Secretary,   Board   of   Revenue   himself   or   his
nominee was directed to conduct an enquiry into the matter.
The Secretary, Board of Revenue or his nominee does not
mean that the Secretary, Board of Revenue will not supervise
the enquiry personally. It is incumbent upon the Secretary,
Board of Revenue to supervise the enquiry personally and
call   the   officers   and   also   to   scrutinize   the   facts   and   the
evidence 'collected by the officers and thereafter take action
in accordance with law.”
[Emphasis applied]
14.
Thereafter, the High Court proceeded on the premise that the effect
of no notice having been served on the respondents entails denial of the
very   valuable   right   of   objections   available   to   them.     That   limited
opportunity is akin to Section 5A of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, and
non­observance thereto, vitiates the acquisition process qua plot No. 673
and the same cannot sustain.

6
15.
We have heard learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the
appellant   as   well   as   learned   counsel   appearing   on   behalf   of   the
respondents and carefully perused the material placed on record.
16.
The 1965 Act mandates issuance of a pre­acquisition notice to such
individuals whose land/property falls within the purview of the proposed
Scheme. On a liberal reading to such provision, the appellant, at best,
could have claimed deemed or substantial compliance of  audi alteram
partem rule provided that Khasra No. 673 was expressly notified in the
public notice dated 17.07.2004. Unfortunately, Khasra Nos. 672 and 673
are conspicuously missing in the public notice dated 17.07.2004. No
individual notices were indisputably served on the respondents for the
reason that they were not recorded as tenure­holders of the subject land
immediately before the issuance of a notice under Section 29 of the 1965
Act.   In   the   absence   of   any   public   or   individual   notice   proposing   to
acquire Khasra No.673, we find merit in the cause espoused on behalf of
the respondents.
17.
Nevertheless, we are equally conscious of the fact that there is a
combative   title   dispute   between   the   respondents   on   one   hand,   and
Chandrika and others on the other.   We, therefore, decline to hold or
declare the respondents to be the true tenure­holders of the subject land.
All that we say is that in the absence of any public or individual notice
proposing to acquire Khasra No. 673, the observations made by the High
Court to the extent that the respondents have been denied an effective

7
opportunity to submit objections to oppose the acquisition in question,
appears to be correct and based upon the record. That being so, the
impugned judgment to the extent it holds that the acquisition process
qua  Khasra No.673 stands vitiated on account of non­compliance with
the prescribed procedure, does not call for any interference.
18.
Having held so, the question that falls for further consideration is
as to what should be the future course of action for the appellant­Board,
so that neither the public interest to utilize the subject­land for the
Scheme that has been substantially developed is frustrated nor the true
tenure holders are deprived of the adequate compensation for their land.
It may be seen from Section 55 of the 1965 Act that the compensation for
the acquired land was required to be assessed in accordance with the
provisions of the Land Acquisition Act 1894, which stood repealed w.e.f.
01.01.2014  by  the  Right  to  Fair  Compensation   and  Transparency  in
Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 (hereinafter
referred to as “the 2013 Act”).     Section 55 of the 1965 Act cannot be
given effect unless it is declared by way of a deeming fiction that instead
of   1894   Act   which   now   stands   repealed,   the   compensation   shall   be
assessed in accordance with the provisions of the 2013 Act.   We hold
accordingly.     Since   the   acquisition   could   not   attain   finality   before
01.01.2014,   we   are   of   the   considered   opinion   that   the   Acquiring
Authority/Board are obligated to pay compensation to the ex­propriated
owners, as is to be assessed in accordance with Section 24(1) of the 2013

8
Act.
19.
Consequently, we hold that the tenure­holders/owners of Khasra
No.673, which was still under the acquisition process when 2013 Act
came into force, shall be entitled to be paid compensation in accordance
with Section 24(1) of the 2013 Act.
20.
We   may   hasten   to   add   that   the   procedure   prescribed   under
Chapter­II of the 2013 Act, mandates to carry out the Social Impact
Assessment   Study   in   certain   situations.   The   adherence   to   such   a
cumbersome procedure in the instant case will be an exercise in futility
for two reasons. Firstly, a major part of the acquired land has already
been utilized for the notified public purpose. Secondly, the study referred
to above, will delay the assessment and payment of compensation to the
true tenure­holders/owners of Khasra No.673. Consequently, we direct
the   appropriate   Government   to   dispense   with   the   procedure
contemplated   under   Chapter   II   of   the   2013   Act.     The   Prescribed
Authority is permitted to accord an opportunity to submit objections
under Section 15 of the 2013 Act and, thereafter, pass an award as per
Section 24(1) of the 2013 Act. The Prescribed Authority/Collector shall
give notice to the respondents as well as to other persons who claim
interest in Khasra Nos.672 and 673, within a period of six weeks. The
objections, if any, shall be filed within four weeks and on consideration of
such objections, the Collector shall be obligated to pass an award on or
before 30.06.2024.

9
21.
We   further   direct  that  the   awarded  amount   shall  be  kept   in  a
nationalized bank in the FDR where it can fetch the maximum rate of
interest. The FDR shall be renewed from time to time till the title dispute
between the respondents and other claimants is resolved by a court of
competent jurisdiction. Whosoever is found entitled to, the appellant­
Board shall release the compensation to them as early as possible but
not later than four weeks after the final adjudication of the title dispute.
22.
The parties shall maintain  status quo regarding the nature of the
land, creation of third­party rights or any encumbrance over the subject­
land until the award is passed, as directed above. On the passing of the
award and deposit of the compensation amount, the appellant­Board
shall be at liberty to utilize the said land for the notified Scheme and/or
for any other public purpose in accordance with law.
23.
Ordered accordingly.
24.
The appeal stands disposed of in the above terms.  No order as to
costs.
 
……...........................J.
 
(SURYA KANT)
      
...................……….........J.
(K.V. VISWANATHAN)
NEW DELHI;
MARCH 05, 2024.

10