2024 INSC 28
REPORTABLE 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL No.8185 OF 2009 
 
ALAGAMMAL AND ORS.  
 
 
 
 
… APPELLANTS 
VERSUS 
GANESAN AND ANR.  
 
 
 
    … RESPONDENTS  
  
 
 
 
 
A1: ALAGAMMAL 
A2: PALANIAMMAL 
A3: MARIAMMAL 
A4: PATTAYEE AMMAL 
A5: KARUPPARAJ 
A6: LAKSHMI 
A7: THANGAM 
A8: MARUTHAMBAL 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
R1: GANESAN  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
R2: MAGUDEESWARI 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH, J. 
 
 
 Heard learned counsel for the parties.
Digitally signed by
POOJA SHARMA
Date: 2024.01.10
15:42:58 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

2 
 
  
2.  The present appeal is directed against the 
Final 
Judgment 
dated 
28.04.2009 
(hereinafter 
referred to as the “Impugned Judgment”) passed by 
the Madurai Bench, Madras High Court (hereinafter 
referred to as “the High Court”) dismissing a 
Second Appeal [S.A. (MD) No.1127 of 2008] filed by 
the appellants/original defendants. 
 
BRIEF FACTS: 
 
3. 
The appellants no.1, 2 and 3 entered into a 
registered Agreement of Sale (hereinafter referred 
to as the “Agreement”) with the respondents on 
22.11.1990 to sell the suit property for a 
consideration 
of 
Rs.21,000/-, 
against 
which 
Rs.3000/- had been received in advance. Further, 
six months’ time was fixed for completion of the 
transaction. The appellants No.1, 2 & 3, in the 
meantime, had executed a Sale Deed with regard to 
the property in question with appellant no.7 on 

3 
 
05.11.1997 for a consideration of Rs.22,000/-. On 
18.11.1997, the respondents sent a Notice to the 
appellants calling upon them to execute the 
Agreement. This led to the respondents filing of 
Original Suit No.165 of 1998 before the Munsif, 
District Court, Dindigul against the appellants 
for specific performance of the Agreement, damages 
and for recovery of money with interest. The suit 
stood dismissed by the Principal District Munsif 
Judge, Dindigul by order dated 10.09.2000. An 
appeal bearing A.S. No.258 of 2008 filed by the 
respondents was allowed by the First Appellate 
Court, and the same has been upheld by the High 
Court by the Impugned Judgment dated 28.04.2009. 
 
 
SUBMISSIONS BY THE APPELLANTS: 
 
4. 
Learned counsel for the appellants submitted 
that 
as 
per 
the 
Agreement, 
the 
balance 
consideration amount of Rs. 18,000/- was to be 
paid within six months which was admittedly not 

4 
 
done. He submitted that the so-called subsequent 
payments 
on 
16.12.1990 
of 
Rs.1,000/-; 
on 
15.04.1991 of Rs.3,000/-, and; on 17.09.1991 of 
Rs.2,500/- though were not actually paid to the 
appellants and even without admitting the same and 
accepting it for the sake of argument, the same is 
incorrect as the fingerprint expert has found the 
thumb-impression of the appellant no.1 as not 
matching 
the 
admitted 
actual 
sample 
thumb-
impression of the appellant no.1. and, thus, the 
very basis of holding that time was not the 
essence of the agreement gets washed away.  It was 
submitted that the Agreement stipulated that if 
there was default on the part of the respondents, 
the advance paid would be forfeited, and the 
entitlement to obtain the Sale Deed and get 
possession free from all encumbrances would also 
end.  
 

5 
 
5. 
It was submitted that once the fingerprint 
has been disapproved of by an expert and such 
report has been brought before the First Appellate 
Court, the claim based on such a document on which 
forgery has been committed itself renders the 
whole transaction inadmissible in law on the well-
settled principle that the respondents did not 
come before the Court with clean hands as the 
entire claim was based on a forged document. 
 
6. 
It was submitted that the claim of the 
respondents to have paid Rs.3,000/- on 18.09.1992; 
Rs.1,800/- on 24.07.1996; Rs.1,300/- on 25.07.1996 
and Rs.1,000/- on 29.07.1996 i.e., a total of 
Rs.20,425/- 
and 
ultimately 
Rs.1,000/- 
on 
21.04.1997 i.e., an excess of Rs. 425/- over the 
amount indicated in the Agreement, was false. 
 
7. 
Learned 
counsel 
submitted 
that 
the 
endorsement(s) made not having been proved, it 
cannot be assumed that the respondents were ready 

6 
 
and willing, or that they had, in fact, paid the 
excess amount. 
 
8. 
It was contended that the Legal Notice sent 
on behalf of the respondents dated 18.11.1997 was 
clearly to get over the fatal lapses on their part 
and to give life to a dead cause i.e., revive the 
Agreement, which already stood incapable of being 
executed through Court due to efflux of time. On 
this issue, the contention was that readiness and 
willingness must be pleaded and proved which has 
not been done as is clear from the averments made 
in the plaint filed by the respondents. Thus, it 
was submitted that the trial court and even the 
First Appellate Court not recording any finding on 
the aspect of the readiness and willingness on the 
part 
of 
the 
respondents, 
the 
High 
Court’s 
observation in the Impugned Judgement on readiness 
and willingness of the respondents is without 
basis. 

7 
 
 
9. 
Learned counsel submitted that readiness and 
willingness has to be specifically pleaded and 
proved as per Section 16(c) of the Specific Relief 
Act, 1963 (hereinafter referred to as the “1963 
Act”) and there cannot be any question of drawing 
inference. Thus, he submitted that the respondents 
were obliged to obtain stamp-paper and draw up the 
Sale Deed, of which there is no indication in the 
plaint. It was urged that this establishes that 
there was no readiness and willingness to comply 
with their obligations in terms of the Agreement. 
 
10. Learned counsel submitted that the thumb-
impression(s) in the endorsement(s) have neither 
matched nor been found to be identical as per the 
fingerprint 
expert’s 
report 
which 
has 
been 
referred to in the judgment of the First Appellate 
Court. 
 

8 
 
11. Learned counsel submitted that as per the 
judgment rendered by the First Appellate Court and 
affirmed by the High Court, the last payment made 
and endorsed on 17.09.1991 has been accepted and 
thus 
three 
years 
from 
such 
date 
would 
be 
16.09.1994 but the suit was instituted only on 
23.03.1998, which is clearly barred by limitation. 
 
12. It was submitted that the Trial Court had 
found that the endorsements were silent regarding 
extension of time, which finding has not been 
disturbed either by the First Appellate Court or 
the High Court and looking at the issue from such 
angle, six months’ time under the Agreement would 
expire on 21.05.1991 and a three-year limitation 
would end on 22.05.1994. On this, learned counsel 
submitted that the contention of the respondents 
that the limitation would start from the judgment 
rendered in Original Suit No.551 of 1992 dated 
24.07.1996, filed by appellant no.1 for seeking 

9 
 
possession and eviction of her husband and mother-
in-law from the suit property, is not the correct 
legal perspective, as mere absence of possession 
would not have defeated the passing of title from 
the appellants in favour of the respondents by the 
execution of a Sale Deed. The object of the 
Agreement was only for conveying the title of the 
property in question. 
 
13. 
Learned 
counsel 
submitted 
that 
neither 
Original Suit No.551 of 1992 nor the judgment 
rendered therein have been mentioned by the 
respondents in Original Suit No.165 of 1998 for 
computing the cause of action for filing suit in 
the year 1998 with regard to the Agreement, which 
was entered into in 1990. Further, it was urged 
that it was incumbent upon the respondents to have 
obtained the Sale Deed and possession through 
Court as set forth in the Default Clause in the 
Agreement 
and 
thus, 
the 
Legal 
Notice 
dated 

10 
 
18.11.1997 by the respondents would not extend the 
time as it had expired much before and such 
unilateral issuance of notice would not get over 
the legal bar of Article 54 of the Limitation Act, 
1963 (hereinafter referred to as the “Act”). 
 
14. Learned 
counsel 
summed 
up 
arguments 
by 
contending that in any view of the matter, prior 
to filing of the suit, the property in question 
had already been sold under registered Sale Deed 
to the appellant no.7 and the suit for specific 
performance was required to be dismissed as the 
Sale 
Deed 
to 
appellant 
no.7 
has 
not 
been 
challenged. 
 
15.  Learned counsel relied upon the decision of 
this Court in K.S. Vidyanadam v Vairavan, (1997) 3 
SCC 1, at Paragraphs 10, 11 and 13 for the 
proposition that Courts in India have consistently 
held that in the case of agreement of sale 
relating to immovable property, time is not the 

11 
 
essence 
of 
the 
contract 
unless 
specifically 
provided to that effect, and the period of 
limitation prescribed by the Act for filing a suit 
was 3 years. 
 
16. It was contended that in the aforesaid 
judgment, the terms of the agreement therein were 
identical to the instant Agreement, inasmuch as 
there was no reference to any tenant in the 
building and it was stated that within six months, 
the plaintiff should purchase the stamp-papers and 
pay the balance consideration upon which the 
defendants shall execute the Sale Deed either in 
his name or the name(s) proposed by him before the 
Sub-Registrar. It was restated that there was no 
prior 
letter/notice 
from 
the 
plaintiffs 
(respondents) 
to 
the 
defendants 
(appellants) 
calling upon them to get the Sale Deed executed 
till the issuance of the Legal Notice dated 

12 
 
18.11.1997 i.e., after a gap of 6 ½ years, 
identical to the facts in K.S. Vidyanadam (supra). 
 
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS: 
 
17. In opposition to the appeal, learned counsel 
for the respondents submitted that on 23.03.1992, 
appellant no.1 had filed Original Suit No.551 of 
1992 against her husband, mother-in-law, second 
wife of her husband and the son of the second 
wife, 
which 
was 
decreed. 
He 
submitted 
that 
appellants even after accepting Rs.425/- over and 
above the amount indicated in the Agreement and 
even after getting a decree for declaration and 
possession of the suit property in her favour on 
24.07.1996, did not execute the Sale Deed due to 
which Legal Notice was sent to her on 18.11.1997. 
As no action was taken, the respondents were 
forced to file a suit on 23.03.1998 seeking 
specific performance. 
 

13 
 
18. Learned counsel submitted that the First 
Appellate Court had recorded that the Sale Deed 
executed by appellant no.1 in favour of appellant 
no.7 dated 05.11.1997 was not bonafide as the said 
sale was effected after getting an order for 
declaration and recovery of possession of the suit 
property in favour of appellant no.1 on 24.07.1996 
in Original Suit No.551 of 1992. 
 
19. 
Learned counsel submitted that the issue 
whether time is the essence of the contract i.e., 
the Agreement would depend also on the conduct of 
the parties and in the present case, when money 
was accepted by appellant no.1, much after the 
stipulated time, clearly the Agreement’s validity 
so as to culminate in sale could not be said to 
have been extinguished, as by accepting money 
later, the time indicated for completion of the 
transaction by execution of Sale Deed had been 
relaxed. 

14 
 
 
20. It was contended that the actual intention of 
the parties was not only to execute the Sale Deed 
but also handover the possession which is an 
implied term of every sale of immovable property 
and thus only when on 24.07.1996, the appellant 
concerned 
became 
capable 
of 
handing 
over 
possession, limitation would start from such date 
as otherwise even if the Sale Deed was executed in 
favour of the respondents, it would have been of 
no real consequence in the absence of possession 
being capable of hand over. 
 
21. Learned counsel contended that the stand 
taken by the appellants, that the proposed sale 
was only for transfer of title and not possession, 
cannot be accepted since the sale of immovable 
property is always for the transfer of possession 
from the seller to the buyer in terms of Section 5 
read with Section 54 of the Transfer of Property 
Act, 1882 (hereinafter referred to as the “TP 

15 
 
Act”). Further, it was submitted that Section 
55(f) of the TP Act contemplates duty of the 
seller to hand over possession of the property at 
the time of sale, and if the seller is not in 
possession of the property at the time of the 
agreement to sell or thereafter, it is a “material 
defect” 
in 
the 
property 
necessarily 
to 
be 
disclosed to the purchaser at the time of sale in 
accordance with Section 55(1)(a) of the TP Act. 
Thus, according to him, it is the obligation of 
the seller to hand over possession at the time of 
sale, as was stipulated in the Agreement. 
 
22. On the question of whether time is of the 
essence in such a contract, it was contended that 
when a party is not in possession to hand over the 
same at the time of execution of an agreement for 
sale, then time would not be of the essence as the 
right to sue would accrue in favour of the person 
to whom the suit property is required to be sold 

16 
 
only upon the vendor being in a position to hand 
over possession of the property to the buyer. It 
was further submitted that subsequent conduct of 
parties is also relevant for testing whether time 
is of the essence of the contract in question. It 
was submitted that in the present case, the 
acceptance of money much after the expiry of the 
six-month period by the appellant no.1 from the 
respondents leaves no doubt that time was not the 
essence and the time for performance of the 
Agreement would commence only after obtainment of 
physical possession by the appellants. 
 
23.  In 
support 
of 
his 
contentions, 
learned 
counsel relied upon the decision of this Court in 
Godhra Electricity Company Limited v State of 
Gujarat, (1975) 1 SCC 199, the relevant paragraphs 
being 11 to 16; of the United Kingdom Supreme 
Court in The Commissioners for Her Majesty’s 
Revenue and Customs v Secret Hotels2 Limited 

17 
 
(formerly Med Hotels Limited), [2014] UKSC 16 
dated 05.03.2014, the relevant being paragraph 331, 
and; The Interpretation of Contracts, 7th Edition 
by Sir Kim Lewison, the relevant being paragraph 
3.189. 
 
ANALYSIS, REASONING AND CONCLUSION: 
 
24. Having considered the matter, this Court 
finds 
that 
the 
Judgment 
impugned 
cannot 
be 
sustained. The moot question revolves around 
whether the Agreement dated 22.11.1990 discloses a 
fixed time-frame for making payment in full by the 
respondents that is, in terms of the recitals in 
the agreement for sale executed by the appellant 
no.1 in favour of the respondents. The admitted 
position is that the time indicated in the 
                                                      
1 ‘33. In English law it is not permissible to take into account the subsequent behaviour or statements of the parties 
as an aid to interpreting their written agreement – see FL Schuler AG v Wickman Machine Tool Sales Ltd [1974] AC 
235. The subsequent behaviour or statements of the parties can, however, be relevant, for a number of other reasons. 
First, they may be invoked to support the contention that the written agreement was a sham – ie that it was not in 
fact intended to govern the parties’ relationship at all. Secondly, they may be invoked in support of a claim for 
rectification of the written agreement. Thirdly, they may be relied on to support a claim that the written agreement 
was subsequently varied, or rescinded and replaced by a subsequent contract (agreed by words or conduct). 
Fourthly, they may be relied on to establish that the written agreement represented only part of the totality of the 
parties’ contractual relationship.’ 

18 
 
Agreement was six months from 22.11.1990 i.e., 
till 21.05.1991 and as per the Legal Notice dated 
18.11.1997 
sent 
by 
the 
respondents 
to 
the 
appellants, only Rs.7000/- was paid within the 
time stipulated. Perusal of the Agreement reveals 
that the respondents had agreed to pay the 
appellants 
Rs.21,000/- 
for 
the 
property 
in 
question, out of which Rs.3,000/- was already paid 
as earnest money and the rest was to be paid 
within 6 months. The respondents were to purchase 
stamp papers at their expense and the appellants 
had to register the Sale Deed either in the name 
of the respondent no.1 or as proposed by him 
before 
the 
Sub-Registrar 
after 
paying 
the 
remaining/balance amount. If the appellants failed 
to register the Sale Deed, respondent no.1 had a 
right to deposit the balance of sale consideration 
in the Civil Court and get sale with possession 
effected through Court from the first party i.e., 
appellants no.1 to 3. 

19 
 
 
25. At this juncture, the Court would indicate 
that within six months there existed the onus of 
paying the entire balance amount of Rs.18,000/- by 
the respondent no.1 to the appellant no.1. It is 
not the case of the respondents that they had even 
offered to pay the remaining/balance amount before 
the expiry of the six-month period. Thus, payment 
of Rs.3,000/- only out of Rs.21,000/- having been 
made, or at best Rs.7,000/- out of Rs.21,000/-, 
which is the amount indicated in the Legal Notice 
sent by the respondents to the appellants, the 
obvious import would be that the respondents had 
not complied with their obligation under the 
Agreement within the six-month period. 
 
26. Pausing here, it is notable that the appellant 
no.1 having accepted payment of Rs.1,000/- on 
21.04.1997 i.e., after appellant no.1 had executed 
a Sale Deed in favour of appellant no.7 on 
05.11.1997, 
coupled 
with 
the 
fact 
that 
the 

20 
 
forensic expert found the two thumb-impressions 
purportedly acknowledging payment after the expiry 
of the time fixed not matching the fingerprints of 
appellant no.1 is clearly indicative that time 
having not been extended, no enforceable right 
accrued to the respondents for getting relief 
under the 1963 Act. At the highest, if the 
appellant no.1 had accepted money from respondent 
no.1 after the expiry of the time-limit, which 
itself has not been conclusively proved during 
trial or even at the first or second appellate 
stages, the remedy available to the defendants was 
to seek recovery of such money(ies) paid along 
with damages or interest to compensate such loss 
but a suit for specific performance to execute the 
Sale Deed would not be available, in the prevalent 
facts and circumstances. In the present case, 
there is also no explanation, as to why, an excess 
amount of Rs.425/-, as claimed, was paid by 
respondent no.1 to the appellant no.1, when the 

21 
 
respondents’ specific stand is that due to the 
appellants not being in possession of the property 
so as to hand over possession to the respondents, 
delay was occasioned. The submission that no 
adverse effect could be saddled on the respondents 
as 
decree 
for 
declaration 
and 
recovery 
of 
possession was obtained by appellant no.1 in her 
favour only on 27.04.1996 is not acceptable for 
the reason that there is no averment that pursuant 
to such decree, she had also obtained possession 
through 
execution. 
Thus, 
the 
decree 
dated 
27.04.1996 also remained only a decree on paper 
without actual possession to appellant no.1. The 
contention 
of 
the 
respondents 
becomes 
self-
contradictory especially with regard to cause of 
action having arisen after such decree in favour 
of the appellant no.1 since even at the time of 
filing the underlying suit, actual possession not 
being with appellant no.1, the Sale Deed could not 
have been executed. 

22 
 
27. Another important aspect that the Court is 
expected 
to 
consider 
is 
the 
fact 
that 
the 
appellant no.7 in whose favour there was a Sale 
Deed with regard to the suit premises, much prior 
to 
issuance 
of 
any 
Legal 
Notice 
and 
the 
institution of the suit in question and that no 
relief had been sought for cancellation of such 
Sale Deed, a suit for specific performance for 
execution of sale deed qua the very same property 
could not be maintained. The matter becomes worse 
for the respondents since such relief was also not 
sought even at the First Appeal stage nor at the 
Second Appeal stage, despite the law permitting 
and providing for such course of action. Even the 
Legal Notice dated 18.11.1997 has been issued 
after almost seven months from the alleged last 
payment 
of 
Rs.1.000/-, 
as 
claimed 
by 
the 
respondents to have been made on 21.04.1997. 
28. Pertinently, 
though 
appellant 
no.7 
was 
arrayed as a defendant in the suit, yet no relief 

23 
 
seeking cancellation of his Sale Deed was sought 
for. 
 
29. The ratio laid down in K.S. Vidyanadam 
(supra) 
which 
had 
a 
similar 
factual 
matrix 
squarely applies in the facts and circumstances of 
the present case, on the issue that time was the 
essence of contract and even if time is not the 
essence of the agreement, in the event that there 
is no reference of any existence of any tenant in 
the building and it is mentioned that within a 
period of six months, the plaintiffs should 
purchase the stamp paper and pay the balance 
consideration 
whereupon 
the 
defendants 
will 
execute the Sale Deed, there is not a single 
letter or notice from the plaintiffs to the 
defendants calling upon them to the tenant to 
vacate and get the Sale Deed executed within time. 
Further, the Legal Notice was issued after two and 
a half years from expiry of the time period in 

24 
 
K.S. Vidyanadam (supra), whereas in the present 
case, the Legal Notice has been issued after more 
than six and a half years. The relevant paragraphs 
from K.S. Vidyanadam (supra) read as under: 
‘10.It has been consistently held by the 
courts in India, following certain early 
English decisions, that in the case of 
agreement of sale relating to immovable 
property, time is not of the essence of the 
contract unless specifically provided to 
that 
effect. 
The 
period 
of 
limitation 
prescribed by the Limitation Act for filing 
a suit is three years. From these two 
circumstances, it does not follow that any 
and every suit for specific performance of 
the 
agreement 
(which 
does 
not 
provide 
specifically that time is of the essence of 
the contract) should be decreed provided it 
is filed within the period of limitation 
notwithstanding the time-limits stipulated 
in the agreement for doing one or the other 
thing by one or the other party. That would 
amount 
to 
saying 
that 
the 
time-limits 
prescribed by the parties in the agreement 
have no significance or value and that they 
mean nothing. Would it be reasonable to say 
that because time is not made the essence 
of 
the 
contract, 
the 
time-limit(s) 
specified 
in 
the 
agreement 
have 
no 
relevance and can be ignored with impunity? 
It would also mean denying the discretion 

25 
 
vested in the court by both Sections 10 and 
20. As held by a Constitution Bench of this 
Court in Chand Rani v. Kamal Rani [(1993) 1 
SCC 519]: (SCC p. 528, para 25) 
“… it is clear that in the case of 
sale of immovable property there is no 
presumption as to time being the essence 
of the contract. Even if it is not of 
the essence of the contract, the Court 
may infer that it is to be performed in 
a reasonable time if the conditions are 
(evident?): (1) from the express terms 
of the contract; (2) from the nature of 
the 
property; 
and 
(3) 
from 
the 
surrounding circumstances, for example, 
the object of making the contract.” 
In other words, the court should look at 
all the relevant circumstances including 
the 
time-limit(s) 
specified 
in 
the 
agreement 
and 
determine 
whether 
its 
discretion to grant specific performance 
should be exercised. Now in the case of 
urban properties in India, it is well-known 
that their prices have been going up 
sharply 
over 
the 
last 
few 
decades 
— 
particularly after 1973 [ It is a well-
known fact that the steep rise in the price 
of oil following the 1973 Arab-Israeli war 
set in inflationary trends all over the 
world. Particularly affected were countries 
like who import bulk of their requirement 
of oil.]. In this case, the suit property 
is the house property situated in Madurai, 
which is one of the major cities of Tamil 

26 
 
Nadu. The suit agreement was in December 
1978 and the six months' period specified 
therein for completing the sale expired 
with 15-6-1979. The suit notice was issued 
by the plaintiff only on 11-7-1981, i.e., 
more than two years after the expiry of six 
months' period. The question is what was 
the plaintiff doing in this interval of 
more than two years? The plaintiff says 
that he has been calling upon Defendants 1 
to 3 to get the tenant vacated and execute 
the sale deed and that the defendants were 
postponing the same representing that the 
tenant is not vacating the building. The 
defendants 
have 
denied 
this 
story. 
According to them, the plaintiff never 
moved in the matter and never called upon 
them to execute the sale deed. The trial 
court has accepted the defendants' story 
whereas the High Court has accepted the 
plaintiff's story. Let us first consider 
whose 
story 
is 
more 
probable 
and 
acceptable. For this purpose, we may first 
turn to the terms of the agreement. In the 
agreement of sale, there is no reference to 
the 
existence 
of 
any 
tenant 
in 
the 
building. What it says is that within the 
period of six months, the plaintiff should 
purchase the stamp papers and pay the 
balance 
consideration 
whereupon 
the 
defendants will execute the sale deed and 
that prior to the registration of the sale 
deed, 
the 
defendants 
shall 
vacate 
and 
deliver possession of the suit house to the 

27 
 
plaintiff. There is not a single letter or 
notice from the plaintiff to the defendants 
calling upon them to get the tenant vacated 
and get the sale deed executed until he 
issued the suit notice on 11-7-1981. It is 
not the plaintiff's case that within six 
months', he purchased the stamp papers and 
offered to pay the balance consideration. 
The defendants' case is that the tenant is 
their own relation, that he is ready to 
vacate at any point of time and that the 
very fact that the plaintiff has in his 
suit notice offered to purchase the house 
with the tenant itself shows that the story 
put forward by him is false. The tenant has 
been examined by the defendant as DW 2. He 
stated that soon after the agreement, he 
was searching for a house but could not 
secure one. Meanwhile (i.e., on the expiry 
of six months from the date of agreement), 
he stated, the defendants told him that 
since 
the 
plaintiff 
has 
abandoned 
the 
agreement, he need not vacate. It is 
equally an admitted fact that between 15-
12-1978 and 11-7-1981, the plaintiff has 
purchased 
two 
other 
properties. 
The 
defendants' consistent refrain has been 
that the prices of house properties in 
Madurai have been rising fast, that within 
the said interval of 2 1/2 years, the 
prices went up three times and that only 
because of the said circumstance has the 
plaintiff (who had earlier abandoned any 
idea of going forward with the purchase of 

28 
 
the 
suit 
property) 
turned 
round 
and 
demanded 
specific 
performance. 
Having 
regard to the above circumstances and the 
oral evidence of the parties, we are 
inclined to accept the case put forward by 
Defendants 1 to 3. We reject the story put 
forward by the plaintiff that during the 
said period of 2 1/2 years, he has been 
repeatedly asking the defendants to get the 
tenant vacated and execute the sale deed 
and that they were asking for time on the 
ground that tenant was not vacating. The 
above finding means that from 15-12-1978 
till 11-7-1981, i.e., for a period of more 
than 2 1/2 years, the plaintiff was sitting 
quiet without taking any steps to perform 
his 
part 
of 
the 
contract 
under 
the 
agreement though the agreement specified a 
period of six months within which he was 
expected to purchase stamp papers, tender 
the balance amount and call upon the 
defendants to execute the sale deed and 
deliver possession of the property. We are 
inclined to accept the defendants' case 
that the values of the house property in 
Madurai town were rising fast and this must 
have induced the plaintiff to wake up after 
2 
1/2 
years 
and 
demand 
specific 
performance. 
11. 
Shri 
Sivasubramaniam 
cited 
the 
decision of the Madras High Court in S.V. 
Sankaralinga Nadar v. P.T.S. Ratnaswami 
Nadar [AIR 1952 Mad 389 : (1952) 1 MLJ 44] 
holding that mere rise in prices is no 

29 
 
ground 
for 
denying 
the 
specific 
performance. With great respect, we are 
unable to agree if the said decision is 
understood as saying that the said factor 
is not at all to be taken into account 
while exercising the discretion vested in 
the court by law. We cannot be oblivious to 
the reality — and the reality is constant 
and continuous rise in the values of urban 
properties 
— 
fuelled 
by 
large-scale 
migration of people from rural areas to 
urban centres and by inflation. Take this 
very case. The plaintiff had agreed to pay 
the balance consideration, purchase the 
stamp papers and ask for the execution of 
sale deed and delivery of possession within 
six months. He did nothing of the sort. The 
agreement expressly provides that if the 
plaintiff fails in performing his part of 
the contract, the defendants are entitled 
to forfeit the earnest money of Rs 5000 and 
that if the defendants fail to perform 
their part of the contract, they are liable 
to pay double the said amount. Except 
paying the small amount of Rs 5000 (as 
against 
the 
total 
consideration 
of 
Rs 
60,000) the plaintiff did nothing until he 
issued the suit notice 2 1/2 years after 
the agreement. Indeed, we are inclined to 
think that the rigor of the rule evolved by 
courts that time is not of the essence of 
the contract in the case of immovable 
properties — evolved in times when prices 
and values were stable and inflation was 

30 
 
unknown — requires to be relaxed, if not 
modified, particularly in the case of urban 
immovable properties. It is high time, we 
do 
so. 
The 
learned 
counsel 
for 
the 
plaintiff 
says 
that 
when 
the 
parties 
entered into the contract, they knew that 
prices are rising; hence, he says, rise in 
prices cannot be a ground for denying 
specific performance. May be, the parties 
knew of the said circumstance but they have 
also specified six months as the period 
within which the transaction should be 
completed. The said time-limit may not 
amount to making time the essence of the 
contract but it must yet have some meaning. 
Not for nothing could such time-limit would 
have been prescribed. Can it be stated as a 
rule of law or rule of prudence that where 
time is not made the essence of the 
contract, all stipulations of time provided 
in the contract have no significance or 
meaning or that they are as good as non-
existent? All this only means that while 
exercising its discretion, the court should 
also bear in mind that when the parties 
prescribe certain time-limit(s) for taking 
steps by one or the other party, it must 
have some significance and that the said 
time-limit(s) cannot be ignored altogether 
on the ground that time has not been made 
the essence of the contract (relating to 
immovable properties). 
xxx 

31 
 
13. In the case before us, it is not mere 
delay. It is a case of total inaction on 
the part of the plaintiff for 2 1/2 years 
in 
clear 
violation 
of 
the 
terms 
of 
agreement which required him to pay the 
balance, purchase the stamp papers and then 
ask for execution of sale deed within six 
months. Further, the delay is coupled with 
substantial rise in prices — according to 
the defendants, three times — between the 
date of agreement and the date of suit 
notice. The delay has brought about a 
situation where it would be inequitable to 
give the relief of specific performance to 
the plaintiff.’  
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
30. The decisions relied upon by the respondents, 
relating to the conduct of parties are of no avail 
to them in the circumstances, as even if the case 
of later payments by the respondents to the 
appellants is accepted, the same being at great 
intervals and there being no willingness shown by 
them to pay the remaining amount or getting the 
Sale Deed ascribed on necessary stamp paper and 
giving notice to the appellants to execute the 
Sale Deed, it cannot be said that in the present 

32 
 
case, judged on the anvil of the conduct of 
parties, especially the appellants, time would not 
remain the essence of the contract. 
31. For 
reasons 
afore-noted, 
the 
Impugned 
Judgment of the High Court as also the judgment of 
the First Appellate Court stand set aside. The 
judgment/order of the Trial Court is revived and 
restored. 
32.  The appeal is allowed accordingly. 
33. In the facts and circumstances, no order as 
to costs is proposed. 
 
   
 ........................J. 
  
 
 
 
 
            [VIKRAM NATH] 
  
` 
     
         
  
 
 
 
........................J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH]  
NEW DELHI 
JANUARY 10, 2024